# Children's Oncology Group data on CAVATICA


As the most fatal of the common childhood cancers, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is caused by the rapid accumulation of immature myeloid cells in the bone marrow. Pediatric AML affects about 25% of all children with leukemia, and half relapse even after extensive treatment and chemotherapy, which is damaging for young developing bodies. Genomic screening has opened the door for personalized approaches to targeted cancer immunotherapy. However, current treatment strategies for pediatric AML are based on genomic and clinical disease presentations in adult patients because the median age of AML onset is > 60 years. Given the heterozygous and mutually exclusive nature of core spliceosomal alterations in cancer and the importance of the spliceosome complex for cancer cell survival, pharmacologic spliceosome modulators have tremendous potential for development in cancer, especially AML. It is known that there are key splicing factor and driver mutation frequencies which differ significantly between pediatric and adult AML patients, thus, the need to derive better therapeutic targets from the perspective of splicing is crucial. The goal of this proposal is to improve the computational breadth of tools available for analyzing pediatric cancer transcriptomes. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that alternative splicing and correlated molecular pathways could play important roles in distinguishing pediatric from adult AML. The objective of this proposal is to interrogate the current understanding of genomic signatures in pediatric vs adult AML to improve the parallel analysis of alternative splicing in large heterogeneous RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) datasets.

This COG dataset was derived directly from a clinical trial (AAML1031) of pediatric de novo AML patients being treated with standard chemotherapy in conjunction with bortezomib (a drug that blocks oncogenic enzymes necessary for cancer growth) [46]. Samples available to the Xing lab through AAML1031 include genomic DNA, total RNA, and whole proteome data. Around 1,200 samples of both WGS and RNA-seq data from these patients are available through the Gabriella Miller Kids First Data Resource, allowing for these powerful tools to provide multi-omic and novel interrogation of AML disease across age groups. Additionally, >200 AML RNA-seq samples from the TARGET dataset will be analyzed.
